So the other side of collection is allocation.
What happens when we allocate an object in Java?
Well ideally,
we'd like this allocation to be as quick as possible. So the simplest
way of doing this is to use pointer arithmetic.
So here we have a pointer that's pointing to the beginning of a heap.
When we allocate an object, that object's allocated at the
pointer, and our pointer is simply moved. So it points to
the next free space in the heap.
The next allocation allocates an object, moves the pointer.
Next allocation, allocates the object, moves the
pointer. And moving the pointer is very,
very cheap.
It's a very,
very quick way of allocating memory. So the previous picture
is fine in a single‑thread environment.
But imagine what happens in a multi‑thread environment.
Here you have two pointers both competing for the same
piece of memory at the same time.
This involves locks, and locks are expensive. So in Java, we use
something called a thread local allocation buffer or a TLAB. And each
thread get its own buffer inside the Eden space.
The threads can only allocate into that buffer.
There's no contention for memory now. Each thread gets its own
buffer, and each thread can just allocate space within that buffer
without competing with another thread.
So there's no locking required. And again, this makes allocation very, very quick.